Genotyping is the process of determining differences in the genetic make-up (genotype) of an individual by examining the individual's
DNA sequence using biological assays and comparing it to another individual's sequence or a reference sequence. It reveals the alleles
an individual has inherited from their parents.[1] Traditionally genotyping is the use of DNA sequences to define biological populations
by use of molecular tools. It does not usually involve defining the genes of an individual.

Current methods of genotyping include restriction fragment length polymorphism identification (RFLPI) of genomic DNA, random amplified
polymorphic detection (RAPD) of genomic DNA, amplified fragment length polymorphism detection (AFLPD), polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
DNA sequencing, allele specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probes, and hybridization to DNA microarrays or beads. Genotyping is important in
research of genes and gene variants associated with disease. Due to current technological limitations, almost all genotyping is partial.
That is, only a small fraction of an individual's genotype is determined, such as with RADseq. New [2] mass-sequencing technologies promise
to provide whole-genome genotyping (or whole genome sequencing) in the future.

Genotyping applies to a broad range of individuals, including microorganisms. For example, viruses and bacteria can be genotyped.
Genotyping in this context may help in controlling the spreading of pathogens, by tracing the origin of outbreaks. This area is often
referred to as molecular epidemiology or forensic microbiology.

Humans can also be genotyped. For example, when testing fatherhood or motherhood, scientists typically only need to examine 10 or 20 genomic
regions (like single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)). That is a tiny fraction of the human genome, which consists of three billion or so nucleotides.

When genotyping transgenic organisms, a single genomic region may be all that needs to be examined to determine the genotype.
A single PCR assay is typically enough to genotype a transgenic mouse; the mouse is the mammalian model of choice for much of
medical research today.

A phenotype (from Greek phainein, meaning "to show", and typos, meaning "type") is the composite of an organism's observable characteristics
or traits, such as its morphology, development, biochemical or physiological properties, phenology, behavior, and products of behavior
(such as a bird's nest). Richard Dawkins in 1978 and then again in 1982 suggested that bird nests and other built structure such as caddis
fly larvae cases and beaver dams are "extended phenotypes". A phenotype results from the expression of an organism's genes as well as the
influence of environmental factors and the interactions between the two. When two or more clearly different phenotypes exist in the same
population of a species, the species is called polymorph.

The genotype of an organism is the inherited instructions it carries within its genome. Not all organisms with the same genotype
look or act the same way because appearance and behavior are modified by environmental and developmental conditions. Likewise, not all
organisms that look alike necessarily have the same genotype.

This genotype-phenotype distinction was proposed by Wilhelm Johannsen in 1911 to make clear the difference between an organism's heredity
and what that heredity produces. The distinction is similar to that proposed by August Weismann, who distinguished between germ plasm
(heredity) and somatic cells (the body). The genotype-phenotype distinction should not be confused with Francis Crick's central dogma
of molecular biology, which is a statement about the directionality of molecular sequential information flowing from DNA to protein,
and not the reverse.
